sphuratparānandarasātmakena tvayā samāsāditabhogalīlā: |
asīmamānandabharaṃ prapannā mahāntamāpurmadamambujākṣya: ||1||
sphurat-parānanda-	resplendent of the supreme bliss
rasātmakena	and the pure Essence embodied
tvayā	with Thee (who were)
samāsādita-	made to participate
bhogalīlā:	in the pleasant sport
asīmam-	(in) boundless
ānandabharaṃ	bliss (being)
prapannā mahāntam-	immersed (they), great
āpu:-madam-	acquired pride
ambuja-ākṣya:	the lotus eyed (damsels)
The lotus eyed damsels were allowed to participate in the pleasant sport with Thee, the very pure embodied essence of the resplendent supreme bliss. They were immersed in boundless bliss and so they fell victim to great pride and self importance.
nilīyate'sau mayi mayyamāyaṃ ramāpatirviśvamanobhirāma: |
iti sma sarvā: kalitābhimānā nirīkṣya govind tirohito'bhū: ||2||
nilīyate-	is engrossed
asau mayi	this (Krishna) in me
mayi-amāyaṃ	in me, without doubt
ramāpati:-	the Consort of Laxmi,
viśva-manobhirāma:	the captivator of the entire universe's mind
iti sma sarvā:	thus indeed all of them
kalitā-abhimānā:	full of pride
nirīkṣya	seeing (them thus)
govind	O Govind!
tirohita:-abhū:	(Thou) disappeared
This Krishna the Consort of Laxmi and the captivator of the minds of the whole world, is engrossed in me.' Full of pride, all of them indeed thought thus. O Govinda! Being aware of this, Thou disappeared from their midst.
rādhābhidhāṃ tāvadajātagarvāmatipriyāṃ gopavadhūṃ murāre |
bhavānupādāya gato vidūraṃ tayā saha svairavihārakārī ||3||
rādhā-abhidhāṃ	Raadhaa named
tāvat	till then
ajāta-garvām-	(who) did not rear pride
ati-priyāṃ	very dear
gopavadhūm	the Gopikaa
murāre	O Slayer of Mura!
bhavān-upādāya	Thou taking her along
gata: vidūraṃ	went far away
tayā saha	with her
svaira-vihāra-kārī	at will sporting (with her)
O Slayer of Mura! One of the Gopikaas, Raadhaa by name, till then had reared no pride. Thou took her along with Thee far away and sported with her at will.
tirohite'tha tvayi jātatāpā: samaṃ sametā: kamalāyatākṣya: |
vane vane tvāṃ parimārgayantyo viṣādamāpurbhagavannapāram ||4||
tirohite-	disappeared
atha tvayi	then (when) Thou
jāta-tāpā:	full of suffering
samaṃ sametā:	together coming
kamalāyata-ākṣya:	the lotus eyed ones
vane vane tvāṃ	in the various forests, Thee
parimārgayantya:	looking for
viṣādam-āpu:-	great grief felt
bhagavan-	O Lord!
apāram	intense
O Lord! When Thou disappeared, the lotus eyed damsels, full of suffering the pangs of separation gathered together, looking around for Thee in the various forests from place to place in intense and utmost grief.
hā cūta hā campaka karṇikāra hā mallike mālati bālavalya: |
kiṃ vīkṣito no hṛdayaikacora: ityādi tāstvatpravaṇā vilepu: ||5||
hā cūta	O mango
hā campaka	O champaka
karṇikāra	Karnikaara
hā mallike	O Mallika
mālati	Maalati
bālavalya:	O tender creepers
kiṃ vīkṣita:	what has been seen (by you all)
na:-hṛdaya-eka-cora:	our hearts' the one stealer
iti-ādi tā:-	thus etc they
tvat-pravaṇā:	to Thee totally devoted
vilepu:	lamented
" O mango, O champaka, O Karnikaar, O Mallika, O maalati, O tender creepers! Did you see the one who has stolen our hearts?' Thus the totally devoted ones asked the fruit and flower trees and lamented.
nirīkṣito'yaṃ sakhi paṅkajākṣa: puro mametyākulamālapantī |
tvāṃ bhāvanācakṣuṣi vīkṣya kācittāpaṃ sakhīnāṃ dviguṇīcakāra ||6||
nirīkṣita:-	is seen
ayaṃ sakhi	this, O friend
paṅkajākṣa:	lotus eyed one (Krishna)
pura: mama-iti-	in front of me, thus
ākulam-	excitedly
ālapantī	saying
tvāṃ	Thee
bhāvanā-cakṣuṣi	(in) imaginative vision (eyes)
vīkṣya kācit	seeing, some (women)
tāpaṃ sakhīnāṃ	sufferings of the friends
dviguṇī-cakāra	double made
O Friend! This lotus eyed Krishna, I see before me,' excitedly declared one of the Gopikas, seeing Thee with her imaginative vision. This only doubled the sufferings of her friends.
tvadātmikāstā yamunātaṭānte tavānucakru: kila ceṣṭitāni |
vicitya bhūyo'pi tathaiva mānāttvayā vimuktāṃ dadṛśuśca rādhām ||7||
tvat-ātmikā:-tā	with Thee identified, they
yamunā-taṭa-ante	on the banks of the Yamunaa
tava-anucakru:	Thy imitated
kila ceṣṭitāni	indeed (Thy) deeds
vicitya	searching
bhūya:-api	all over again
tathā-eva mānāt-	and also because of pride
tvayā vimuktāṃ	from Thee separated
dadṛśu:-ca	(they) saw and
rādhām	Raadhaa
They had completely identified themselves with Thee. So, on the banks of the Yamunaa river they enacted and imitated Thy deeds. They went about searching for Thee all over again and they saw Raadhaa who was also separated from Thee because of pride.
tata: samaṃ tā vipine samantāttamovatārāvadhi mārgayantya: |
punarvimiśrā yamunātaṭānte bhṛśaṃ vilepuśca jagurguṇāṃste ||8||
tata: samaṃ tā:	then together all of them
vipine samantāt-	in the forest from end to end
tamovatāra-avadhi	till the darkness descending
mārgayantya:	searching
puna:-vimiśrā	again coming together
yamunā-taṭa-ante	on the banks of the Yamunaa
bhṛśaṃ vilepu:-	intensely lamented
ca jagu:-	and sang
guṇān-te	Thy glories
Together all of them went searching for Thee from end to end in the forest till it was dark. Again coming together on the banks of Yamunaa, they intensely lamented and spoke to each other about Thy glories and excellences.
tathā vyathāsaṅkulamānasānāṃ vrajāṅganānāṃ karuṇaikasindho |
jagattrayīmohanamohanātmā tvaṃ prādurāsīrayi mandahāsī ||9||
tathā vyathā-saṅkula-	thus pain overcome
mānasānām	minded
vrajāṅganānām	of the Vraja women
karuṇaikasindho	O Thou the ocean of mercy!
jagat-trayī-mohana-	the infatuator of the three world's Cupid
mohana-ātmā	(Thee) his captivator
tvaṃ	Thee
prādu:-āsī:-	appeared in front
ayi	O Thou
mandahāsī	smiling softly
O ocean of mercy! O charmer of Cupid who charms the three worlds! Thou then appeared smiling softly in front of the Vraja women whose minds were overcome by grief and pain.
sandigdhasandarśanamātmakāntaṃ tvāṃ vīkṣya tanvya: sahasā tadānīm |
kiṃ kiṃ na cakru: pramadātibhārāt sa tvaṃ gadāt pālaya māruteśa ||10||
sandigdha-	doubtful of
sandarśanam-	seeing (meeting) Thee
ātma-kāntam	their own beloved
tvāṃ vīkṣya	Thee seeing
tanvya: sahasā	the damsels suddenly
tadānīm	then
kim kim	what what
na cakru:	not did
pramada-ati-bhārāt	by intense joyful state
sa tvam	that such Thou
gadāt pālaya	from misery save me
māruteśa	O Lord of Guruvaayur
The beautiful women who were doubtful of seeing Thee, when they suddenly saw their own beloved in front, in what all ways did they not show their intensity of joy? That Thou O Lord of Guruvaayur! Save me from misery.